The last time we talked to you, you had mentioned that's just what you were
finishing up. So I just wanted to ask a little bit more about it after I read
them. I guess this is sort of a general question, but to concentrate, say,
specifically on Kirin and Arafel, if I'm saying those correctly. Yeah, that's
correct. Were they modeled on any particular analogs? No. No, not really.
As far as I'm aware, I just came up with a nut of whole cloth. Okay, the bigger
question, what I was really interested in was why is
Celtic and Welsh mythology, say, so appropriate for fantasy? Well, I think
partly because I, and probably many readers, hold our ancestry from this area.
and when you grow up within a culture you grow up subconsciously with that
culture's myths taught you many of them in the form of attitudes and the way you
look at the world expectations and this sort of thing I think it's useful for
someone to be in contact with the actual mythos of the culture from which he
comes, because that way you can examine more thoroughly the origins and
significance of the attitudes which you may hold. Okay, you did, though, use
some standard figures from Celtic mythology, didn't you? Like the, oh, let's say
the Grugai, the Puka, the Thishi, and so forth? Yes, they are figures out of
Celtic, And Catholic folklore, yes. As a matter of fact, as far as I'm aware,
all of the figures that I used do come from that well, as it were. Okay, you do
a great deal to make fantasy characters real, not the usual cardboard
stereotypes. I find this fairly rare in fantasy. And I wondered if it was a
conscious effort on your part, or that's the way you normally would write. I
treat a fantasy character the same way I treat any other character I handle.
I think that, well, myself I'm very bored when I read a character who is an
absolute stereotype. I suppose that there would be a way to write a stereotype
in such a way that they become interesting, the one that I can think of outhand.
And if T.H. White's handling is a character of Galahad, he does handle him as a
stereotype, but he does it so artfully that you begin to understand that that's
his problem. A creation which I somewhat admire, but in general, if a writer is
not aware exactly exactly what commodity he's handling,
have been the writers in a great deal of difficulty. And myself, I don't believe
that any person I've ever met was average.
And perhaps that attitude spills over into my writing. Okay, as far as I can
tell, you've written two books on Eildwood so far. when you conceived of the
idea of that series, the two books, did you conceive of it as one, two, or more
books? No, actually I conceived of it as a short story. I got a chance to work
with my brother, and the two of us together somewhat created Arafel. He did the
visual and I did the story when we did the Don Grant book. And when it became a
novel I started putting The Dreamstone together with Eldwood.
And of course they're not long enough for a novel. And then I began realizing I
was going to have to rewrite the whole thing. But by the time I'd done all the
research that I finally felt that I needed, I had so much material left over
that that's how there happened to be a second book, but that's all there will
be, as far as I intend.
Okay, to Merchanter's Luck for just a minute, I guess, which is a little before
both of those books. Again, the emphasis on there, to me, anyhow, is on
character, along with a very convincing hard science background.
I imagine that was quite a bit easier to write than Dunbelow Station, wasn't it?
Not quite. Actually, it was a book I started to write when I discovered I needed
background for it. So Dunbelow Station happened. You'll very often find that the
books would seem to flow the easiest and to be so simple. The stories were in
them quite, you know, quite deceptively simple. really do so on the groundwork
of a very, very large background.
And that's precisely what happened there.
The world that you've created, the universe you've created for those two books,
Down Below Station and Merchander's Luck, is a very complete one. You've gone to
a lot of trouble to set it up. I wondered if you had sort of, now that you have
sort of a future history in hand, if you plan to go on with it. Well, they
already have. Actually, The Faded Sun sits within it. It happens considerably in
the future and in a somewhat different direction. The Chana books sit within it.
They happen in the opposite direction from Pel, which is Pelsetti.
and actually the only books that don't really fit into it are the fantasy ones.
Okay, The Faded Sun Trilogy is one of my favorite series. I guess I hadn't
gotten that connection. Actually, it's quite remote simply because it's so far
away. But if you recall the infamous security organization, ALSEC his alliance.
It was founded by Sidney Mallory and continually within the alliance you have
two forces that swing back and forth. You have the forces of constitutional law
as represented by Damon Constantine in Gumbelow Station. You have the forces of
security in the military as represented by Mallory. you see a little bit of that
in Merchander's Luck less of it in Down to the Station because of course it's an
informative period although you certainly see more of Mallory and you'll see it
again in a book called 40,000 in Gehenna which is, I guess, as of this September
from Fantasia Press and in that one that's the period just after down below
station in which what I call the alliance union period of dirty tricks when they
formally signed a peace treaty that are out maneuvering for advantage and do
some rather unwise things it's a period of cold war
Okay, yeah. Just one more brief question on the world down below station and
Merchander's Luck. Do you plan any more works within that exact same period?
Well, yes, there may be. I haven't decided. I'm going to write some more of what
I call Merchander's stories. I think that the figure of the trader, the person
of commerce after all what we're going out into space for has been sadly
neglected in science fiction you know, any fiction is conflict and one of the
easiest conflicts of all to generate is military and perhaps in our enthusiasm
for writing exciting plots. We go overboard with battles and
a feeling, you know, that tomorrow and the future are going to be populated by
people with way guns and warships, this sort of thing. And one of the things
I've been trying to bring forward is that though perhaps these things will exist
in the long run it's the merchants that are the real heroes the ones that
ultimately make civilization work and in some of the stories that I want to
write within this universe it's going to be a conflict indeed that it'll be a
different sort of conflict a conflict of
men against hazards people against adversities of various sorts that are sort of
like the tales of the merchant marine instead of the military Okay, on the last
interview we got listening to it the other day, we did get a bunch on
Merchander's Luck, even though I hadn't read the book at the time, so that's
probably enough on that particular area. One I just thought of, let me stick an
extra question in here, I'm getting down to the end. Are you moving towards some
goal or some vision at the end of this future history, at the end of the
civilizations you're setting up? Well, it's quite a large thing. I have a book
of my own, which I doubt the world will ever see, which is merely a list of
dates that coordinates the whole thing. And in a way, I'm telling the story of
two superpowers, which begin in about the year 2350 and continue thousands of
years into the future in various incarnations. The shockwaves sort of continue
through the centuries. and one of the points is that there are various times the
heroes or the villains some of my stories take place from the union point of
view some of them from alliance there are times at which alliance becomes
exceedingly repressive other points at which it is clearly the hero in the story
there are times in which Union becomes a very unpleasant place, in which to live
in other times at which it affords more freedom than the Alliance does. So it's
more a very long-term story of the life and conduct of states as characters. But
it will never appear in a single book because the story is so strung out over so
many different periods and so many different aspects. It's rather like telling,
say, the history of Europe and the history of Asia or whatever. They eventually
grow too large even to call them nations.
Okay, in other words, then you don't have any vision of a future universal
Armageddon or some evolutionary spot the human race is moving toward that would,
you know, some big culmination of these things? Well, in a way, the little theme
that you saw toward the end of the Faded Sun is a very important marker in this
period. No, I don't see a universal Armageddon. I think we've got more sense
than that. We've at least demonstrated it thus far.
I think that there will be a time of course one great change happens within Down
Bay Station it's when however unwillingly Earth has to realize that mankind is
not terrestrial anymore
there's another important point somewhat further on when mankind begins to
revise its ancestral ideas about property and place and territoriality
beginning to adapt to space as a lifestyle and a way of thinking you see what
they've done at the beginning they've carried the idea of nationhood and
boundaries into space in an environment where it patently doesn't make enough
sense. And their contact with the marine is somewhat important in forming
a part of what becomes a vastly changed outlook on the universe as a whole.
Okay, that book 40,000 of Gehenna, you said that's between the down-below
station world and the Fated Sun trilogy somewhere in between those two? Oh, yes,
yes. It fits actually in between the sequences down below Station, Merchanger's
Luck, which sort of overlaps. Then Serpent's Reach, and then The Fated Sun, give
or take a thousand years or so in intervals. But Gehenna fits in between Down
below Station and Serpent's Reach. It's a period where Union has decided to cut
Alliance off. Alliance only has one world, and they're really determined to nip
that in the bud before they are able to expand to anything else. And there is
territorially adjacent to hell, There's a little stretch of planeted stars, and
Union knows it hasn't got enough resources to go in there and take them and
develop the planets. So it decides that it will last them up so that they become
untenable. And they do that by dropping 30
-odd thousand people on each world without ecological preparation, without
anything. They're expendables. And the idea being that if the colonies take,
there will always be a problem for alliance because they're union-idoctrinated.
If they fail, they will create such ecological disaster that alliance would
never be able to use the place anyway. Okay, thank you. Okay, I have two more.
One of them involves your... You've answered this a little bit as you've gone
along, some of your future plans. I guess two things. I would ask sort of a
general question about I assume you'll be writing both fantasy and science
fiction in the future. And secondly, are you planning any more short story
collections?
Well, I... Okay, short story collections. not as such if one happens it will
happen I suppose that well I just don't write many short stories most of the
short stories I've written have been for directly for anthologies and some of
them are going to be the sort of thing that's more or less confined to a
particular anthology such as The Thiefs World which I do largely for fun.
The question whether I shall continue to write fantasy, I have, I find,
I used to write a great deal more of it than I do now. And the proportion that I
write now is probably the amount that I will continue to write. Not very much,
but some.
Okay. Okay, I really have one more question. This is sort of a strange one. I
hope you don't take it the wrong way, but I believe I've read everything that
you've published. Maybe you missed a few short stories, but in my opinion, you
are getting better. Now, that's not saying early science fiction isn't good,
because it is. Well, one always hopes it wouldn't be better. Well, I was going
to ask, are you conscious of yourself getting better? I'm conscious that that
things get easier to do perhaps my touch is a little shorter it's sort of like
riding a horse I've done it a long time you don't fall off as much I can
conceive of stories now without any doubt that I can write them I used to go
much more to the seat of my pants than I do. I think I'm much more in control of
my medium than I was at the beginning. My goodness who isn't. After you've
written a dozen books or so, you get to the point where you've already
discovered how to achieve a certain number of effects, and I hope that I will
continue to challenge myself with things that are harder to do. I think that one
of the things that I've enjoyed very much is working with a publisher who does
not attempt to hold me to one type of literature. I can write anything I want to
write. and I find that that's artistically stimulating I don't if I conceive of
doing a story I don't have to go before a committee and sell it I don't have to
promise that I'm going to do it I just do it in the confidence that it will work
and that it will be thought and that that to me is a very precious kind of
artistic freedom. So I hope, indeed, I am getting better. I plan to go on
getting better. I don't plan to
sit still at a particular level. I will continue to experiment with the medium,
doing occasional strange things and occasional traditional things as the mood
takes me. Okay, this is more an observation rather than a question, But I would
say the areas that I've been very impressed with and seen you get better in is
one thing, is the depth and complexity of your characterization, but also a
more, especially in these last three books, Merchandre's Luck and Dreamstone and
the Tree of Swords and Jewels, is a, I guess, an economy where you can say so
much more in fewer words. Well, that's very nice. Economy of expression is
something that I'm quite fond of. I think that one of my earliest idols, oddly
enough, is a very dead Roman by the name of Tubius Virgilius Morrow, who was, I
think, one of the world's great masters at that. Man could say more in two words
than most people could achieve in ten and hit you with the most unexpected turns
in the middle of these sentences. And I always lamented as a student that one
couldn't do that in English, and I did a lot of translating, and I did work at
it a great deal, trying to achieve what he achieved in the English language
coming out of Latin. Well, I think that it did have quite a bit of effect on my
idea of what good style is. I've always felt that if one could write with
economy in plain language so that you can be easily followed, that you use the
words for maximum effect according to position,
so that things occur to the reader more or less in the order in which they would
occur to the person in that situation, that you have managed to achieve a great
glow of immediacy by that effect. that you live producing instead of simply
sitting in and being told about it. And indeed, that is something that I
consciously try to achieve, is to tell the most what I can in the smallest
amount of space. Okay, good. Gosh, there are a million things I think I'd asked,
but then I remember that first interview and I already covered most of the other
things I can think of, so I'll just let that do duty, you know, what I've asked
before. Okay. So I guess the only thing I would say finally is do you, you know,
as brief as this has been, I'm sure I've left out a lot. Is there anything you
would like to say or get on, you know, to get in that interview that can have
published? Currently I've got a piece coming out this spring called Voyager at
Night.
and I'm working right now on a sequel to The Pride of Chanur done not just
because I have a major love of sequels but because I do a kind of a future
history thing sometimes I haven't told quite all of a thing when I get through
with an individual plot involving individual people so there's more to what
happens in the contact than I had a chance to tell in Pride of Chanur and
there's some questions left unanswered and so all of a sudden the bug hit and I
felt like doing a book which the Chanur books to me are fun to do I enjoy doing
them and for me they're kind of lighthearted and a chance to deal
with a character who absolutely refuses doom and gloom.
So that's been my project for quite a while and actually it got larger than I
planned so it looks as if there are going to be two Chanur sequels. As a matter
of fact, I just started the second one. My goodness, I would imagine it's not
going to be too long, and maybe somebody's already done this, is to do some kind
of essay or timeline on your future history like I've seen for, say, Heinlein or
Anderson or so forth. Well, some people have inquired about this sort of thing.
The thing that I worry about is that my events currently take place a great
distance apart. I know what the connecting logic is,
as the creator, as long as I keep it sort of close to me, I can play games with
it as I will. I'm a little nervous about having it set in concrete or print, as
the case may be. But I have with, or at least, I can't even remember if I did
it. But I thought at one time about including a little bit of chronology in
appendices with some of my stories. I'm not even sure if I got around to doing
that. But I may in future stories, which may give some people help at any rate.
And I could
see something like that happening eventually. Listen, where does Hunter of
Worlds fit in? Well, Hundred Worlds is sort of one of those little things that
happens off in a side pocket at a far future time. It sounds from the viewpoint
of the local people very much as if all of humanity is involved. Actually, it's
a little area of colonial expansion that didn't work out terribly well. and I
have an idea where it's set, which is considerably out beyond where anybody has
gotten to yet in my stories, but it's pretty well out on the fringes, I would
say, probably. in the
about halfway between Talsetti and Sirius up to about 40 odd light years plus
okay good listen I said 10 minutes and I'm sorry I'm well over that now but I
get fascinated talking about these things well listen as I told you in the
letter um you know we're putting together it's going to be a series of hardback
books from this press and uh you're going to be in the first volume and it this
is the first book we've done and it's um we're going to have to update all the
interviews we have to get the author's permissions the whole thing so it's
probably going to be i would say a year at least before it's out oh sure why i
always i always figure it's one year between doing it and getting it in the door
Yeah, we will obviously send you a copy of it. Okay. And we sure appreciate the
time you've given us. Alright, I wish you a lot of luck with it. Thank you, Ms.
Cherryh. We may be seeing a convention one of these days. Alright. Okay. Are you
headed down to Fantasy Festival? When is that? This weekend, though. No, I'm
afraid I can't. I teach here at the college, Odessa College. I'm an English
teacher, and... They've got you, huh? Yeah, I've got a stack of papers to my
office ceiling to grade, and we have two weeks after... Thanksgiving before
Christmas starts, vacation, so my Christmas vacation is going to be my big
vacation time, I'm going to California and probably visit some of the places out
there but I don't know when the next convention I'll go get to is but anyhow
good luck with your riding and I'm sure looking forward to it. Okay, thank you.
Thank you. Bye. Bye-bye.